---
layout: post
title: "\"Web Hooks\""
date: 2008-11-26T22:43:30-06:00
comments: false
categories: [Flickr, Programming, Web Services, FriendFeed, Twitter, Web Hooks, GitHub]
published: true
alias: [/blog/post/web-hooks]
---

A few months back GitHub_ rolled out its implementation of something that they
call "Service Hooks".  The idea behind these hooks is that when you commit
some new piece of code to GitHub, they want to be able to alert other services
that you have committed that code.  For example, one of the service hooks is
the ability to send a tweet to Twitter, and another of those hooks updates the 
Lighthouse_ ticket tracker.

I thought this was a really good idea when they rolled it out, so I did a bit of
searching and found out that there is a larger body of work surrounding this
idea, and that body of work is called `Web Hooks`_.  The central idea behind
web hooks is that a user supplies a service that they use with a URL.  Then,
when that user performs an action on that service, the service agrees to send an
HTTP POST request to the user's specified URL, with some information about the
action that the user took on the service.

SlideShare has an excellent presentation_ deck about this idea, which likens it
to Unix pipes.  That analogy makes a lot of sense if you think about it.  With
the standard model that most websites follow today, a client can only send
requests.  This means repeated polling until the client receives the information
that it is interested in.  With web hooks, however, the service is responsible
for passing that action along to the next service.  This simple yet powerful
mechanism can allow for very advanced systems which interoperate very simply
through chaining.

Let's expore a concrete example of what this might look like.  A few months back
I signed up for a pro account on Flickr_, so that I could upload some of the
pictures that I had stored on my computer.  What I did was to upload some
pictures with descriptions, and then I went and posted on Twitter some of the
links to those pictures.  I also went and added that new Flickr account to
FriendFeed_ so that others could see my pictures as well.

This was all a manual process.  If both Flickr and Twitter supported web hooks,
I could have simply set up their respective URLs and uploaded my pictures.  The
process might have happened like this:  First, the pictures are uploaded.  Then
Flickr sends a POST request to Twitter, with the description of the picture and
a link to the picture.  Twitter sends a POST request to FriendFeed, adding the
new item to my FriendFeed lifestream.

You could even write custom scripts to handle the web hooks. For example let's
say that I want any tweet with the name 'Kevin' to be sent to my brother's email
address.  I could add a URL to Twitter linking to a script on my computer which
scans the contents of the tweet.  If the tweet has the name 'Kevin' in it, it
would send an email.  If not, it might do nothing.

I think that this concept is very powerful not only in terms of rendering
trivial the interoperability between disparate services, but also in terms of
simply saving on bandwidth and computing power.  Technologies which constantly
poll resources hoping for updated content seem silly in comparison to the
powerful simplicity that web hooks provide.

There are definitely some drawbacks to a system like this.  Firstly, the name: I
actually can't think of a worse name for this concept.  Web hooks?!  Let's come
up with something better.  All joking aside though, this type of system does
face a serious problem when it comes to the question of reliability.  If a
script receives no POST, it could mean that either no event happened, or that
the internet connection went down for a bit, or that the service is down, or any
number of other possible things.  I think the solution for this is a hybrid
model of sparse polling in conjunction with web hooks.

Most of all, this technology just seems so underused.  There are ridiculously
few people who implement something like this, yet it seems like an undeniably
useful service--especially given its relative simplicity to implement.  Let's
all try to encourage the services that we use on a daily basis to support web
hooks, because by doing just that, we can make the web a lot better.

.. _GitHub: http://github.com/
.. _Lighthouse: http://lighthouseapp.com/
.. _`Web Hooks`: http://webhooks.pbwiki.com/
.. _presentation: http://www.slideshare.net/progrium/web-hooks
.. _Flickr: http://flickr.com/
.. _FriendFeed: http://friendfeed.com/