---
layout: post
title: "2008 in Review & 2009 Goals"
date: 2009-01-02T21:19:17-06:00
comments: false
categories: [Django, Goals, Review, Life, Programming]
published: true
alias: [/blog/post/2008-review-2009-goals]
---

Yesterday was the day of "2008 in review" posts.  I really enjoyed reading over
what people had accomplished during the year, and what they planned on doing in
the new year.  I hadn't planned on writing this post, but for some reason I'm
doing it anyway.  So here goes, not much technical stuff ahead, so if personal
stuff bores you then click away now.

2008 in Review
--------------------

What a fantastic year.  What a crazy year.  I don't think there's ever been a
year in my life so filled with change.  For starters, I...

* Learned Erlang
* Joined Twitter_ and FriendFeed_
* Drove 3 hours to caucus in Iowa (what a strange ritual that is!)
* Met some_ really_ cool_ people_ at `PyCon 2008`_
* Became involved in the Pinax_ project
* Wrote and released my first 7 open source Django applications
* Guest hosted `a podcast`_
* Learned how to use Git_
* Graduated from college with bachelor's degree in Computer Science
* Accepted a job offer with `Mochi Media`_
* Moved to San Francisco
* Released a series of `14 screencasts`_ building a project from the ground up
* Wrote `one blog post every day`_ in the month of November
* Quit drinking soda
* Participated in the most notable election of my lifetime
* Started a `Django San Francisco local user group`_

...but those are just the highlights.  It's been really interesting
transitioning from college student to the real world.  Somehow I thought that
not having homework would mean that I would have more free time to do other
things, but it turns out that you actually have less time if you have a job to
go to every day.

But I don't think that being a student ever stopped.  I've learned so much from
my coworkers: different ways of thinking about problems, theoretical problems,
real world challenges, prioritizing work, RESTful principles of the web, and
a whole lot about databases.  This is what I like about this industry.  However
much you know, there's more to learn, and people are generally willing to share
their expertise with you.

I've learned a lot about what it means to be part of a community; part of a
company.  I've learned a lot about life, this year.

But the learning's not over.

Goals for 2009
--------------------

While I'm weary of posting my goals for all the world to see, I think it's
important to codify them and make them public.  That way, maybe it'll compel me
to actually follow through on these goals.  I've tried to keep them realistic
and with a few exceptions, specific enough to be testable.  Without further ado,
here are my goals for 2009 (in no particular order):

* Learn a concatenative/stack-based language
* Meet new people, especially those that I wouldn't normally meet
* Write a virtual machine
* Double both my blog and Twitter followership
* Be more consistent in my contributions to the Pinax project, instead of helping in fits and spurts like I currently am
* Post at least twice a month to this blog
* Release some non-open source software, and maybe even charge for it
* Work out an average of 2 times a week or more over the whole year
* Learn Processing_
* Learn about investments, and invest 10% of my earnings each month
* Give a talk at a conference

I think that all of these goals are achievable.  In fact, I'd like to do more
than just what I listed here, but these are the ones I'm willing to commit to.
Frankly, I can't wait to see how this year shapes up.  If it turns out to be
anything like last year, I'm in for quite a ride.

.. _Twitter: http://twitter.com/ericflo
.. _FriendFeed: http://friendfeed.com/ericflo
.. _some: http://lazypython.blogspot.com/
.. _really: http://oebfare.com/
.. _cool: http://blog.michaeltrier.com/
.. _people: http://jtauber.com/
.. _`PyCon 2008`: http://us.pycon.org/2008/about/
.. _Pinax: http://pinaxproject.com/
.. _`a podcast`: http://thisweekindjango.com/
.. _Git: http://git.or.cz/
.. _`Mochi Media`: http://www.mochimedia.com/
.. _`14 screencasts`: http://thisweekindjango.com/screencasts/
.. _`one blog post every day`: http://www.eflorenzano.com/blog/archive/2008/11/
.. _`Django San Francisco local user group`: http://www.meetup.com/The-San-Francisco-Django-Meetup-Group/
.. _Processing: http://processing.org/